<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
    <title>Bibliography - Escape The Hell Myth</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/style.css"/>
    <style>
        :root {
            --primary-color: #2a4365;
            --secondary-color: #7f9cf5;
            --accent-color: #f6ad55;
            --light-bg: #f7fafc;
            --dark-text: #2d3748;
            --light-text: #fff;
            --callout-bg: #ebf4ff;
        }
        
        body {
            font-family: 'Merriweather', serif;
            color: var(--dark-text);
            line-height: 1.8;
            background-color: var(--light-bg);
            max-width: 1200px;
            margin: 0 auto;
            padding: 2rem;
            text-align: justify;
        }
        
        .container {
            width: 100%;
            max-width: 950px;
            margin: 0 auto;
            padding: 20px;
        }
        
        h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {
            font-family: 'Playfair Display', serif;
            color: var(--primary-color);
            margin-top: 1.5em;
            margin-bottom: 0.75em;
            line-height: 1.3;
        }
        
        h1 {
            font-size: 2.5rem;
            text-align: center;
            margin-top: 2rem;
            margin-bottom: 1.5rem;
        }
        
        h2 {
            font-size: 2rem;
            border-bottom: 2px solid var(--secondary-color);
            padding-bottom: 0.3em;
        }
            .callout-title {
                margin-bottom: 0.5rem !important;
                page-break-after: avoid;
            }
        
        p {
            text-align: justify;
            margin-bottom: 1.5rem;
        }
        
        .bibliography-entry {
            padding-left: 2rem;
            text-indent: -2rem;
            margin-bottom: 1rem;
        }
        
        .category-container {
            margin-bottom: 2.5rem;
        }
        
        .navigation-buttons {
            display: flex;
            justify-content: space-between;
            margin: 3rem 0;
            padding: 1rem 0;
            border-top: 1px solid var(--secondary-color);
        }
        
        .nav-button {
            display: inline-block;
            padding: 0.75rem 1.5rem;
            background-color: var(--primary-color);
            color: white;
            text-decoration: none;
            border-radius: 0.5rem;
            font-family: 'Roboto', sans-serif;
            font-weight: 500;
            transition: background-color 0.3s ease;
        }
        
        .nav-button:hover {
            background-color: var(--secondary-color);
        }

        /* Print-specific styles */
        @media print {
            /* Page setup */
            @page {
                size: 8.5in 11in;
                margin: 1in;
            }
            
            /* Base styles */
            body {
                font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
                font-size: 14pt;
                line-height: 1.6;
                color: #000;
                background: #fff;
                margin: 0;
                padding: 0;
            }
            
            /* Hide navigation */
            .navigation,
            .nav-link,
            .navigation-buttons,
            .nav-button,
            nav,
            .navbar,
            .menu,
            .breadcrumb,
            .pagination,
            [class*="nav"],
            [class*="menu"],
            [class*="breadcrumb"] {
                display: none !important;
            }
            
            /* Preserve content styling */
            .bible-quote {
                font-family: 'Palatino Linotype', 'Book Antiqua', Palatino, serif;
                font-style: italic;
                color: #000;
                background: #f0f4f8;
                border-left: 4px solid #4299e1;
                padding: 1.2rem 1.5rem;
                margin: 1.5rem 0;
                border-radius: 0 0.5rem 0.5rem 0;
                page-break-inside: avoid;
            }
            
            .highlight,
            .callout {
                page-break-inside: auto;
                margin: 1rem 0;
            }
            
            /* Keep these sections together when possible */
            .book-section,
            .series-section {
                page-break-inside: avoid;
                margin: 1rem 0;
            }
            
            /* Typography */
            h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {
                page-break-after: avoid;
                page-break-inside: avoid;
                color: #000;
            }
            
            h1 {
                font-size: 22pt;
                margin-bottom: 1rem;
            }
            
            h2 {
                font-size: 18pt;
                margin-top: 1.5rem;
                margin-bottom: 0.5rem;
            }
            .callout-title {
                margin-bottom: 0.5rem !important;
                page-break-after: avoid;
            }
            
            p {
                page-break-inside: auto;
                orphans: 2;
                widows: 2;
                margin-bottom: 0.5rem;
            }
            
            /* Allow list items to break but keep paragraphs intact */
            li {
                orphans: 2;
                widows: 2;
            }
            
            /* Images */
            img {
                max-width: 100% !important;
                height: auto !important;
                page-break-inside: avoid;
                display: block;
                margin: 1rem auto;
            }
            
            /* Page breaks */
            .page-break {
                page-break-before: always;
            }
            
            .no-break {
                page-break-inside: avoid;
            }
            
            .chapter {
                page-break-before: always;
            }
            
            /* Tables */
            table {
                page-break-inside: auto;
                border-collapse: collapse;
                width: 100%;
            }
            
            /* Keep table rows together when possible */
            tr {
                page-break-inside: avoid;
            }
            
            th, td {
                border: 1px solid #000;
                padding: 0.5rem;
                text-align: left;
            }
            
            /* Allow info-boxes (like the prophecy table box) to break */
            .info-box {
                page-break-inside: auto;
            }
            
            /* Reduce info-box title margins */
            .info-box-title {
                margin-bottom: 0.75rem !important;
                page-break-after: avoid;
            }
            
                        /* Reduce margins on callout-quotes to prevent large gaps */
            .callout-quote {
                margin: 1rem 0 !important;
                padding: 1rem !important;
            }
            
/* Lists */

            ul, ol {
                page-break-inside: auto;
            }
            
            /* Links */
            a {
                color: #000;
                text-decoration: none;
            }
            
            /* Hide elements that shouldn't print */
            .no-print,
            .screen-only {
                display: none !important;
            }
            
            /* Preserve original container and layout */
            .container {
                padding: 20px;
            }
        }
    </style>
</head>
<body>
<body>
<div class="container">
<h1>Bibliography</h1>
<p>The following sources were consulted during the research and writing of "Escape the Hell Myth: Rediscover The Teachings Of Jesus On Love." These works represent a comprehensive range of biblical scholarship, linguistic studies, historical research, and theological perspectives on the topics of hell, eternal punishment, and the authentic teachings of Jesus.</p>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Primary Biblical Sources</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Aland, Kurt, et al., eds. The Greek New Testament. 5th rev. ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Aland, Kurt, et al., eds. Novum Testamentum Graece. 28th ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 2012.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia. 5th ed. Edited by Karl Elliger and Wilhelm Rudolph. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 1997.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                The Holy Bible, New International Version. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2011.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                The New Oxford Annotated Bible: New Revised Standard Version with the Apocrypha. 5th ed. Edited by Michael D. Coogan. New York: Oxford University Press, 2018.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Linguistic and Lexical Studies</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Arndt, William, Frederick W. Danker, and Walter Bauer. A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Brown, Francis, S.R. Driver, and Charles A. Briggs. The Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon. Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 1996.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Kittel, Gerhard, and Gerhard Friedrich, eds. Theological Dictionary of the New Testament. 10 vols. Translated by Geoffrey W. Bromiley. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964-1976.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Liddell, Henry George, and Robert Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon. 9th ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Mounce, William D. Mounce's Complete Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Strong, James. Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible. Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1990.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Thayer, Joseph Henry. Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament. Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 1996.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Vine, W.E. Vine's Complete Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words. Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1996.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Historical and Theological Studies on Hell and Afterlife</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Balfour, Graham. "The Development of the Doctrine of Hell in the Early Church." Journal of Theological Studies 32 (1981): 359-390.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Bartlet, J. Vernon. "The Development of the Doctrine of Future Punishment in Christian Thought." Expositor 4 (1901): 81-96.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Bernstein, Alan E. The Formation of Hell: Death and Retribution in the Ancient and Early Christian Worlds. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Bremmer, Jan N. The Rise and Fall of the Afterlife. London: Routledge, 2002.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Casey, R.P. "Early Christian Views on Hell." Journal of Biblical Literature 56 (1937): 199-220.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Constable, John. The Duration and Nature of Future Punishment. 2nd ed. London: Hamilton, Adams &amp; Co., 1868.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Elledge, Casey A. "Resurrection of the Dead: Exploring Our Earliest Evidence Today." In Resurrection: The Origin and Future of a Biblical Doctrine. New York: T&amp;T Clark, 2006.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Fudge, Edward William. The Fire That Consumes: A Biblical and Historical Study of the Doctrine of Final Punishment. 3rd ed. Eugene: Cascade Books, 2011.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Green, Joel B. Body, Soul, and Human Life: The Nature of Humanity in the Bible. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Hughes, Philip Edgecumbe. The True Image: The Origin and Destiny of Man in Christ. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1989.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Jeremias, Joachim. The Parables of Jesus. 2nd rev. ed. Translated by S.H. Hooke. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1972.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Levenson, Jon D. Resurrection and the Restoration of Israel: The Ultimate Victory of the God of Life. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                MacDonald, George. Unspoken Sermons: First Series. London: Strahan &amp; Co., 1867.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Marshall, Christopher D. Beyond Retribution: A New Testament Vision for Justice, Crime, and Punishment. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2001.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Segal, Alan F. Life After Death: A History of the Afterlife in the Religions of the West. New York: Doubleday, 2004.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Biblical Translation and Textual Criticism</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Alter, Robert. The Five Books of Moses: A Translation with Commentary. New York: W.W. Norton, 2004.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Barclay, William. The New Testament: A New Translation. 2 vols. London: Collins, 1969.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Evans, Craig A. Ancient Texts for New Testament Studies: A Guide to the Background Literature. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Metzger, Bruce M. A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament. 2nd ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 1994.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Meyer, Marvin W., ed. The Nag Hammadi Scriptures: The Revised and Updated Translation of Sacred Gnostic Texts. New York: HarperOne, 2009.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Nida, Eugene A., and Charles R. Taber. The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden: Brill, 1969.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Tov, Emanuel. Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible. 3rd ed. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2012.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Wallace, Daniel B. Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Studies on Gehenna and Ancient Jerusalem</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Bar-Kochva, Bezalel. Judas Maccabaeus: The Jewish Struggle Against the Seleucids. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Benoit, Pierre, J.T. Milik, and Roland de Vaux. Les Grottes de Murabba'at. Discoveries in the Judaean Desert 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Crossan, John Dominic. Who Killed Jesus? Exposing the Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Gospel Story of the Death of Jesus. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1995.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Feldman, Louis H. Josephus and Modern Scholarship (1937-1980). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1984.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Goodman, Martin. The Ruling Class of Judaea: The Origins of the Jewish Revolt Against Rome, A.D. 66-70. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Hengel, Martin. The Charismatic Leader and His Followers. Translated by James C.G. Greig. New York: Crossroad, 1981.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Josephus, Flavius. The Jewish War. Translated by G.A. Williamson. Revised edition by E. Mary Smallwood. New York: Penguin Books, 1981.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Mazar, Benjamin. The Mountain of the Lord. Garden City: Doubleday, 1975.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Price, Jonathan J. Jerusalem Under Siege: The Collapse of the Jewish State 66-70 C.E. Leiden: Brill, 1992.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Vermes, Geza. The Dead Sea Scrolls in English. 4th ed. New York: Penguin Books, 1995.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Historical Jesus and Early Christianity</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Borg, Marcus J. Meeting Jesus Again for the First Time: The Historical Jesus and the Heart of Contemporary Faith. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Crossan, John Dominic. The Historical Jesus: The Life of a Mediterranean Jewish Peasant. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1991.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ehrman, Bart D. Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Pagels, Elaine. The Gnostic Gospels. New York: Random House, 1979.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Spong, John Shelby. Biblical Literalism: A Gentile Heresy: A Journey into a New Christianity Through the Doorway of Matthew's Gospel. New York: HarperOne, 2016.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Tabor, James D. The Jesus Dynasty: The Hidden History of Jesus, His Royal Family, and the Birth of Christianity. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2006.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Vermes, Geza. The Authentic Gospel of Jesus. London: Penguin Books, 2003.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Wright, N.T. Jesus and the Victory of God. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1996.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Universal Reconciliation and Restoration</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ballou, Hosea. An Examination of the Doctrine of Future Retribution, on the Principles of Morals, Analogy, and the Scriptures. Boston: Universalist Publishing House, 1834.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Beecher, Edward. History of Opinions on the Scriptural Doctrine of Retribution. New York: D. Appleton, 1878.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Hanson, John Wesley. The Greek Word Aion-Aionios. Boston: Universalist Publishing House, 1875.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                MacDonald, George. The Hope of the Gospel. London: Longmans, Green, 1892.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Moffatt, James. The First Five Centuries of the Church. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1938.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Winslow, Octavius. The Sympathy of Christ: A Consideration of the Tender Feelings of the Redeemer. New York: Robert Carter &amp; Brothers, 1863.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="category-container">
<h2>Recent Scholarship (Post-2010)</h2>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Bell, Rob. Love Wins: A Book About Heaven, Hell, and the Fate of Every Person Who Ever Lived. New York: HarperOne, 2011.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Gaventa, Beverly Roberts. When in Romans: An Invitation to Linger with the Gospel According to Paul. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2016.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Johnson, Elizabeth A. Ask the Beasts: Darwin and the God of Love. London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Konstan, David. "Aion, Chronos, and Kairos in Classical and Christian Thought." In Time and Temporality in the Ancient World, edited by Ralph M. Rosen, 91-110. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, 2013.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                MacDonald, Gregory. The Evangelical Universalist: The Biblical Hope That God's Love Will Save Us All. 2nd ed. Eugene: Cascade Books, 2012.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Mikoski, Gordon S. "The Wrath of God and the Love of God: Karl Barth's Theology of Revelation and Reconciliation." International Journal of Systematic Theology 13, no. 2 (2011): 158-178.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Moltmann, Jürgen. The Sun of Righteousness Shall Arise: God's Future for Humanity and the Earth. Translated by Margaret Kohl. Eugene: Cascade Books, 2010.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Plant, Stephen J. Taking Stock of Bonhoeffer: Studies in Biblical Interpretation and Ethics. London: Routledge, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ramelli, Ilaria L.E. The Christian Doctrine of Apokatastasis: A Critical Assessment from the New Testament to Eriugena. Leiden: Brill, 2013.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ramelli, Ilaria L.E. A Larger Hope? Universal Salvation from Christian Beginnings to Julian of Norwich. Eugene: Cascade Books, 2019.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ramelli, Ilaria L.E. "The Universal Restoration (Apokatastasis) in Gregory of Nyssa: The Theological Perspective." Augustinianum 53, no. 1 (2013): 175-208.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Resseguie, James L. "The Apocalypse of John and the Shape of Worldview." In The Oxford Handbook of Apocalyptic Literature, edited by John J. Collins, 317-337. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Smith, James K.A. How (Not) to Be Secular: Reading Charles Taylor. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Talbott, Thomas. The Inescapable Love of God: An Essay on Universal Salvation. 2nd ed. Eugene: Cascade Books, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Thatcher, Adrian. The Savage Text: The Use and Abuse of the Bible. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Ticciati, Susannah. "The Apokatastasis of Everything: Universal Reconciliation in Origen and Gregory of Nyssa." Modern Theology 29, no. 3 (2013): 421-440.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Williams, Rowan. Being Christian: Baptism, Bible, Eucharist, Prayer. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2014.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Wright, N.T. The Day the Revolution Began: Reconsidering the Meaning of Jesus's Crucifixion. New York: HarperOne, 2016.
            </div>
<div class="bibliography-entry">
                Yong, Amos. The Cosmic Breath: Spirit and Nature in the Christianity-Buddhism-Science Trialogue. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
            </div>
</div>
<div class="navigation-buttons">
<a class="nav-button" href="appendix.html">Previous: Appendix</a>
<a class="nav-button" href="toc.html">Contents</a>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</body>
</html>